The Part-Time Parliament
Leslie Lamport
This article appeared inACM Transactions on Computer Sys-
tems 16, 2 (May 1998), 133-169. Minor corrections were made
on 29 August 2000.
The Part-Time Parliament
LESLIE LAMPORT
Digital Equipment Corporation
Recent archaeological discoveries on the island of Paxos reveal that the parliament functioned de-
spite the peripatetic propensity of its part-time legislators. The legislators maintained consistent
copies of the parliamentary record, despite their frequent forays from the chamber and the forget-
fulness of their messengers. The Paxon parliament’s protocol provides a new way of implementing
the state-machine approach to the design of distributed systems.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: C2.4 [ Computer-Communications Networks]: Distributed
Systems— Network operating systems ;D 4 . 5[ Operating Systems ]: Reliability— Fault-tolerance;
J.1 [ Administrative Data Processing ]: Government
General Terms:Design, Reliability
Additional Key Words and Phrases:State machines, three-phase commit, voting
This submission was recently discovered behind a ﬁling cabinet in the TOCS editorial
oﬃce. Despite its age, the editor-in-chief felt that it was worth publishing. Because the
author is currently doing ﬁeld work in the Greek isles and cannot be reached, Iwas asked
to prepare it for publication.
The author appears to be an archeologist with only a passing interest in computer sci-
ence. This is unfortunate; even though the obscure ancient Paxon civilization he describes
is of little interest to most computer scientists, its legislative system is an excellent model
for how to implement a distributed computer system in an asynchronous environment.
Indeed, some of the reﬁnements the Paxons made to their protocol appear to be unknown
in the systems literature.
The author does give a brief discussion of the Paxon Parliament’s relevance to dis-
tributed computing in Section 4. Computer scientists will probably want to read that
section ﬁrst. Even before that, they might want to read the explanation of the algorithm
for computer scientists by Lampson [1996]. The algorithm is also described more formally
by De Prisco et al. [1997]. Ihave added further comments on the relation between the
ancient protocols and more recent work at the end of Section 4.
Keith Marzullo
University of California, San Diego
Authors’ address:Systems Research Center, Digital Equipment Corporation, 130 Lytton Avenue,
Palo Alto, CA 94301.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are
not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title
of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the
Association for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or
speciﬁc permission.
c⃝ 1998 ACM 0000-0000/98/0000-0000 $00.00
2 · Leslie Lamport
1T h e P r o b l e m
1.1 The Island of Paxos
Early in this millennium, the Aegean island of Paxos was a thriving mercantile cen-
ter.
1 Wealth led to political sophistication, and the Paxons replaced their ancient
theocracy with a parliamentary form of government. But trade came before civic
duty, and no one in Paxos was willingto devote his life to Parliament. The Paxon
Parliament had to function even though legislators continually wandered in and out
of the parliamentary Chamber.
The problem of governing with a part-time parliament bears a remarkable corre-
spondence to the problemfaced by today’sfault-tolerant distributed systems, where
legislators correspond to processes and leaving the Chamber corresponds to failing.
The Paxons’ solution may therefore be of some interest to computer scientists. I
present here a short history of the Paxos Parliament’s protocol, followed by an even
shorter discussion of its relevance for distributed systems.
Paxoncivilization wasdestroyedbya foreigninvasion, and archeologistshavejust
recently begun to unearth its history. Our knowledge of the Paxon Parliament is
therefore fragmentary. Although the basic protocols are known, we are ignorant of
manydetails. Wheresuchdetailsareofinterest, Iwill takethe libertyofspeculating
on what the Paxons might have done.
1.2 Requirements
Parliament’s primary task was to determine the law of the land, which was deﬁned
by the sequence of decrees it passed. A modern parliament will employ a secretary
to record its actions, but no one in Paxos was willingto remain in the Chamber
throughout the session to act as secretary. Instead, each Paxon legislator main-
tained a ledger in which he recorded the numbered sequence of decrees that were
passed. For example, legislatorΛ˘ινχ∂’s ledger had the entry
155: The olive tax is 3 drachmas per ton
if she believed that the 155
th decree passed by Parliament set the tax on olives to 3
drachmas per ton. Ledgers were written with indelible ink, and their entries could
not be changed.
Theﬁrstrequirementoftheparliamentaryprotocolwasthe consistency of ledgers,
meaning that no two ledgers could contain contradictory information. If legislator
Φισ∂ϵρhad the entry
132: Lamps must use only olive oil
in his ledger, then no other legislator’s ledger could have a diﬀerent entry for decree
132. However, another legislator might have no entry in his ledger for decree 132 if
he hadn’t yet learned that the decree had been passed.
Consistency of ledgers was not suﬃcient, since it could be trivially fulﬁlled by
leaving all ledgers blank. Some requirement was needed to guarantee that decrees
1It should not be confused with the Ionian island of Paxoi, whose name is sometimes corrupted
to Paxos.
The Part-Time Parliament · 3
were eventually passed and recorded in ledgers. In modern parliaments, the passing
of decrees is hindered by disagreement among legislators. This was not the case
in Paxos, where an atmosphere of mutual trust prevailed. Paxon legislators were
willingto pass any decree that was proposed. However, their peripatetic propensity
posed a problem. Consistency would be lost if one group of legislators passed the
decree
37: Painting on temple walls is forbidden
and then left for a banquet, whereupon a diﬀerent group of legislators entered
the Chamber and, knowingnothingabout what had just happened, passed the
conﬂictingdecree
37: Freedom of artistic expression is guaranteed
Progress could not be guaranteed unless enough legislators stayed in the Cham-
ber for a long enough time. Because Paxon legislators were unwilling to curtail
their outside activities, it was impossible to ensure that any decree would ever be
passed. However, legislators were willing to guarantee that, while in the Chamber,
they and their aides would act promptly on all parliamentary matters. This guar-
antee allowedthe Paxonsto devise a parliamentaryprotocol satisfyingthe following
progress condition.
If a majority of the legislators
2 were in the Chamber and no one entered
or left the Chamber for a suﬃciently longperiod of time then any decree
proposed by a legislator in the Chamber would be passed, and every
decreethathadbeenpassedwouldappearintheledgerofeverylegislator
in the Chamber.
1.3 Assumptions
The requirementsofthe parliamentaryprotocolcould be achievedonlyby providing
the legislators with the necessary resources. Each legislator received a sturdy ledger
inwhichtorecordthedecrees,apen, andasupplyofindelibleink. Legislatorsmight
forget what they had been doing if they left the Chamber,
3 so they would write
notes in the back of the ledgers to remind themselves of important parliamentary
tasks. An entry in the list of decrees was never changed, but notes could be crossed
out. Achieving the progress condition required that legislators be able to measure
the passage of time, so they were given simple hourglass timers.
Legislators carried their ledgers at all times, and could always read the list of
decrees and any note that had not been crossed out. The ledgers were made of the
ﬁnest parchment and were used for only the most important notes. A legislator
would write other notes on a slip of paper, which he might (or might not) lose if
he left the Chamber.
The acoustics of the Chamber were poor, makingoratory impossible. Leg islators
could communicate only by messenger, and were provided with funds to hire as
2In translating the progress condition, I have rendered the Paxon wordµαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτ as majority
of the legislators . Alternative translations of this word have been proposed and are discussed in
Section 2.2.
3In one tragic incident, legislator Tω υ ϵ γdeveloped irreversible amnesia after being hit on the
head by a falling statue just outside the Chamber.
4 · Leslie Lamport
many messengers as they needed. A messenger could be counted on not to garble
messages, but he might forget that he had already delivered a message, and deliver
it again. Like the legislators they served, messengers devoted only part of their
time to parliamentary duties. A messenger might leave the Chamber to conduct
some business—perhaps taking a six-month voyage—before delivering a message.
He might even leave forever, in which case the message would never be delivered.
Although legislators and messengers could enter and leave at any time, when
inside the Chamber they devoted themselves to the business of Parliament. While
they remained in the Chamber, messengers delivered messages in a timely fashion
and legislators reacted promptly to any messages they received.
The oﬃcial records of Paxos claim that legislators and messengers were scrupu-
lously honest and strictly obeyed parliamentary protocol. Most scholars discount
this as propaganda, intended to portray Paxos as morally superior to its eastern
neighbors. Dishonesty, although rare, undoubtedly did occur. However, because it
was never mentioned in oﬃcial documents, we have little knowledge of how Par-
liament coped with dishonest legislators or messengers. What evidence has been
uncovered is discussed in Section 3.3.5.
2 The Single-Decree Synod
The Paxon Parliament evolved from an earlier ceremonial Synod of priests that
was convened every 19 years to choose a single, symbolic decree. For centuries, the
Synod had chosen the decree by a conventional procedure that required all priests
to be present. But as commerce ﬂourished, priests began wandering in and out of
the Chamber while the Synod was in progress. Finally, the old protocol failed, and
a Synod ended with no decree chosen. To prevent a repetition of this theological
disaster, Paxon religious leaders asked mathematicians to formulate a protocol for
choosingthe Synod’s decree. The protocol’s requirements and assumptions were es-
sentially the same as those of the later Parliament except that instead of containing
a sequence of decrees, a ledger would have at most one decree. The resulting Synod
protocol is described here; the Parliamentary protocol is described in Section 3.
Mathematiciansderivedthe Synodprotocolin aseriesofsteps. First, theyproved
results showingthat a protocol satisfyingcertain constraints would g uarantee con-
sistency and allow progress. Apreliminary protocol was then derived directly from
these constraints. A restricted version of the preliminary protocol provided the
basic protocol that guaranteed consistency, but not progress. The complete Synod
protocol, satisfyingthe consistency and prog ress requirements, was obtained by
restrictingthe basic protocol.
4
The mathematical results are described in Section 2.1, and the protocols are
described informally in Sections 2.2–2.4. A more formal description and correctness
proof of the basic protocol appears in the appendix.
4The complete history of the Synod protocol’s discovery is not known. Like modern computer
scientists, Paxon mathematicians would describe elegant, logical derivations that bore no resem-
blance to how the algorithms were actually derived. However, it is known that the mathematical
results (Theorems 1 and 2 of Section 2.1) really did precede the protocol. They were discovered
when mathematicians, in response to the request for a protocol, were attempting to prove that a
satisfactory protocol was impossible.
The Part-Time Parliament · 5
2.1 Mathematical Results
The Synod’s decree was chosen through a series of numberedbal lots, where a ballot
was a referendum on a single decree. In each ballot, a priest had the choice only
of votingfor the decree or not voting .
5 Associated with a ballot was a set of
priests called a quorum. A ballot succeeded iﬀ (if and only if) every priest in the
quorum voted for the decree. Formally, a ballotB consisted of the followingfour
components. (Unless otherwise qualiﬁed,set is taken to meanﬁnite set.6)
Bdec A decree (the one beingvoted on).
Bqrm A nonempty set of priests (the ballot’s quorum).
Bvot A set of priests (the ones who cast votes for the decree).7
Bbal A ballot number.
A ballotB was said to besuccessful iﬀBqrm ⊆Bvot, so a successful ballot was one
in which every quorum member voted.
Ballot numbers were chosen from an unbounded ordered set of numbers. If
B′
bal >B bal, then ballotB′ was said to be later than ballotB. However, this
indicated nothingabout the order in which ballots were conducted; a later ballot
could actually have taken place before an earlier one.
Paxon mathematicians deﬁned three conditions on a setB of ballots, and then
showed that consistency was guaranteed and progress was possible if the set of
ballots that had taken place satisﬁed those conditions. The ﬁrst two conditions
were simple; they can be stated informally as follows.
B1(B) Each ballot inB has a unique ballot number.
B2(B) The quorums of any two ballots inB have at least one priest in common.
The third condition was more complicated. One Paxon manuscript contained the
following, rather confusing, statement of it.
B3(B) For every ballotB in B, if any priest inB’ sq u o r u mv o t e di na ne a r l i e r
ballot in B, then the decree ofB equals the decree of the latest of those
earlier ballots.
Interpretation of this cryptic text was aided by the manuscript pictured in Figure 1,
which illustrates conditionB3(B)w i t has e tB of ﬁve ballots for a Synod consisting
o ft h eﬁ v ep r i e s t sA ,B ,Γ ,∆ ,a n dE .T h i ss e tB contains ﬁve ballots, where for
each ballot, the set of voters is the subset of the priests in the quorum whose names
are enclosed in boxes. For example, ballot number 14 has decreeα,aq u o r u m
containingthree priests, and a set of two voters. ConditionB3(B) has the form
“for everyB in B: ...”,where“ ... ” is a condition on ballotB. The conditions for
the ﬁve ballotsB of Figure 1 are as follows.
5Like some modern nations, Paxos had not fully grasped the nature of Athenian democracy.
6Although Paxon mathematicians were remarkably advanced for their time, they obviously had
no knowledge of set theory. I have taken the liberty of translating the Paxon’s more primitive
notation into the language of modern set theory.
7Only priests in the quorum actually voted, but Paxon mathematicians found it easier to convince
people that the protocol was correct if, in their proof, they allowed any priest to vote in any ballot.
6 · Leslie Lamport
# decree quorum and
 voters
2
 α ABΓ
 ∆
5
 β AB
 Γ
 E
14
 α
 B
 ∆
 E
27
 β
 A
 Γ
 ∆
29
 β
 B
 Γ∆
Fig. 1. Paxon manuscript showing a set B, consisting of ﬁve ballots, that satisﬁes conditions
B1(B)–B3(B). (Explanatory column headings have been added.)
2. Ballot number 2 is the earliest ballot, so the condition on that ballot is trivially
true.
5. None of ballot 5’s four quorum members voted in an earlier ballot, so the
condition on ballot 5 is also trivially true.
14. The only member of ballot 14’s quorum to vote in an earlier ballot is ∆, who
voted in ballot number 2, so the condition requires that ballot 14’s decree must
equal ballot 2’s decree.
27. (This is a successful ballot.) The members of ballot 27’s quorum are A, Γ, and
∆. Priest A did not vote in an earlier ballot, the only earlier ballot Γ voted in
was ballot 5, and the only earlier ballot ∆ voted in was ballot 2. The latest of
these two earlier ballots is ballot 5, so the condition requires that ballot 27’s
decree must equal ballot 5’s decree.
29. The members of ballot 29’s quorum are B, Γ, and ∆. The only earlier ballot
that B voted in was number 14, priest Γ voted in ballots 5 and 27, and ∆ voted
in ballots 2 and 27. The latest of these four earlier ballots is number 27, so the
condition requires that ballot 29’s decree must equal ballot 27’s decree.
To stateB1(B)–B3(B) formally requires some more notation. A vote v was
deﬁned to be a quantity consistingof three components: a priest v
pst, a ballot
numbervbal, and a decreevdec. It represents a vote cast by priestvpst for decree
vdec in ballot numbervbal. The Paxons also deﬁnednull votes to be votesv with
vbal = −∞ andvdec = blank,w h e r e−∞<b< ∞ for any ballot numberb,a n d
blank is not a decree. For any priestp, they deﬁned null p to be the unique null
votev withvpst =p.
Paxon mathematicians deﬁned a total orderingon the set of all votes, but part
of the manuscript containingthe deﬁnition has been lost. The remainingfrag ment
indicates that, for any votesv andv′,i fvbal <v ′
bal thenv<v ′.I ti sn o tk n o w n
how the relative order ofv andv′ was deﬁned ifvbal =v′
bal.
For any setB of ballots, the setVotes(B)o fv o t e si nB was deﬁned to consist of
all votesv such thatvpst ∈Bvot, vbal =Bbal,a n dvdec =Bdec for someB ∈B .
Ifp is a priest andb is either a ballot number or±∞,t h e nMaxVote(b,p, B)w a s
The Part-Time Parliament · 7
deﬁned to be the largest votev in Votes(B)c a s tb yp withvbal <b ,o rt ob enull p
if there was no such vote. Sincenull p is smaller than any real vote cast byp,t h i s
means that MaxVote(b,p, B) is the largest vote in the set
{v ∈ Votes(B):( vpst =p) ∧ (vbal <b )}∪{ null p}
For any nonempty setQ of priests, MaxVote(b,Q, B) was deﬁned to equal the
maximum of all votesMaxVote(b,p, B)w i t hp inQ.
ConditionsB1(B)–B3(B) are stated formally as follows.8
B1(B)
∆
= ∀B,B ′ ∈B :( B ̸=B′) ⇒ (Bbal ̸=B′
bal)
B2(B)
∆
= ∀B,B ′ ∈B : Bqrm ∩B′
qrm ̸= ∅
B3(B)
∆
= ∀B ∈B :( MaxVote(Bbal,B qrm, B)bal ̸= −∞) ⇒
(Bdec = MaxVote(Bbal,B qrm, B)dec)
Although the deﬁnition of MaxVote depends upon the orderingof votes, B1(B)
implies that MaxVote(b,Q, B)dec is independent of how votes with equal ballot
numbers were ordered.
To show that these conditions imply consistency, the Paxons ﬁrst showed that
B1(B)–B3(B) imply that, if a ballotB in B is successful, then any later ballot in
B is for the same decree asB.
Lemma IfB1(B),B2(B),a n dB3(B) hold, then
((Bqrm ⊆Bvot) ∧(B′
bal >B bal)) ⇒ (B′
dec =Bdec)
for any B,B′ in B.
Proof of Lemma
For any ballotB in B,l e tΨ(B, B) be the set of ballots inB later thanB for a
decree diﬀerent fromB’s:
Ψ(B, B)
∆
= {B′ ∈B :(B′
bal >B bal) ∧(B′
dec ̸=Bdec)}
To prove the lemma, it suﬃces to show that ifBqrm ⊆Bvot thenΨ(B, B)i se m p t y .
The Paxons gave a proof by contradiction. They assumed the existence of aB with
Bqrm ⊆Bvot andΨ(B, B) ̸= ∅, and obtained a contradiction as follows.9
1. ChooseC ∈Ψ(B, B) such thatCbal =m i n{B′
bal :B′ ∈Ψ(B, B)}.
Proof:C exists becauseΨ(B, B) is nonempty and ﬁnite.
2. Cbal >B bal
Proof: By 1 and the deﬁnition ofΨ(B, B).
3. Bvot ∩Cqrm ̸= ∅
Proof:B yB2(B) and the hypothesis thatBqrm ⊆Bvot.
8I use the Paxon mathematical symbol
∆
=, whic h mean tequals by deﬁnition .
9Paxon mathematicians always provided careful, structured proofs of important theorems. They
were not as sophisticated as modern mathematicians, who can omit many details and write
paragraph-style proofs without ever making a mistake.
8 · Leslie Lamport
4. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)bal ≥Bbal
Proof: By 2, 3 and the deﬁnition ofMaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B).
5. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B) ∈ Votes(B)
Proof: By 4 (which implies thatMaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B) is not a null vote)
and the deﬁnition ofMaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B).
6. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)dec =Cdec.
Proof:B y5a n dB3(B).
7. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)dec ̸=Bdec
Proof: By 6, 1, and the deﬁnition ofΨ(B, B).
8. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)bal >B bal
Proof:B y4 ,s i n c e7a n dB1(B)i m p l yt h a tMaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)bal ̸=Bbal.
9. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B) ∈ Votes(Ψ(B, B))
Proof: By 7, 8, and the deﬁnition ofΨ(B, B).
10. MaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B)bal <C bal
Proof: By deﬁnition ofMaxVote(Cbal,C qrm, B).
11. Contradiction
Proof: By 9, 10, and 1.
End Proof of Lemma
With this lemma, it waseasytoshowthat, ifB1–B3hold, then anytwosuccessful
ballots are for the same decree.
Theorem 1. IfB1(B),B2(B),a n dB3(B) hold, then
((Bqrm ⊆Bvot) ∧(B′
qrm ⊆B′
vot)) ⇒ (B′
dec =Bdec)
for any B,B′ in B.
Proof of Theorem
If B′
bal = Bbal,t h e nB1(B) impliesB′ = B.I f B′
bal ̸= Bbal, then the theorem
follows immediately from the lemma.
End Proof of Theorem
The Paxons then proved a theorem assertingthat if there are enoug h priests in
the Chamber, then it is possible to conduct a successful ballot while preservingB1–
B3. Although this does not guarantee progress, it at least shows that a balloting
protocol based onB1–B3 will not deadlock.
Theorem 2. Letb be a bal lot number and Q a set of priests such that b>B bal
andQ ∩Bqrm ̸= ∅ for all B ∈B .I f B1(B),B2(B),a n dB3(B) hold, then there is a
bal lotB′ withB′
bal =b andB′
qrm =B′
vot =Q such thatB1(B∪{B′}),B2(B∪{B′}),
andB3(B∪{ B′}) hold.
Proof of Theorem
ConditionB1(B∪{B′}) follows fromB1(B), the choice ofB′
bal, and the assumption
aboutb. ConditionB2(B∪{ B′}) follows fromB2(B), the choice ofB′
qrm,a n dt h e
assumption aboutQ.I f MaxVote(b,Q, B)bal = −∞ then letB′
dec be any decree,
else let it equalMaxVote(b,Q, B)dec. Condition B3(B∪{ B′}) then follows from
B3(B).
End Proof of Theorem
The Part-Time Parliament · 9
2.2 The Preliminary Protocol
The Paxons derived thepreliminary protocol from the requirement that conditions
B1(B)–B3(B) remain true, whereB was the set of all ballots that had been or were
beingconducted. The deﬁnition of the protocol speciﬁed how the setB changed,
but the set was never explicitly calculated. The Paxons referred toB as a quantity
observed only by the gods, since it might never be known to any mortal.
Each ballot was initiated by a priest, who chose its number, decree, and quorum.
Each priest in the quorum then decided whether or not to vote in the ballot. The
rules determininghow the initiator chose a ballot’s number, decree, and quorum,
and how a priest decided whether or not to vote in a ballot were derived directly
from the need to maintainB1(B)–B3(B).
To maintainB1, each ballot had to receive a unique number. By remembering
(with notes in his ledger) what ballots he had previously initiated, a priest could
easily avoid initiatingtwo diﬀerent ballots with the same number. To keep diﬀerent
priests from initiatingballots with the same number, the set of possible ballot
numbers was partitioned amongthe priests. While it is not known how this was
done, anobviousmethod wouldhavebeen tolet a ballotnumberbe a pairconsisting
of an integer and a priest, using a lexicographical ordering, where
(13,Γρα ˘ι)< (13,Λινσϵ˘ι)< (15,Γρα ˘ι)
sinceΓ came beforeΛ in the Paxon alphabet. In any case, it is known that every
priest had an unbounded set of ballot numbers reserved for his use.
To maintainB2, a ballot’s quorum was chosen to contain aµαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτof
priests. Initially, µαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτjust meant a simple majority. Later, it was ob-
served that fat priests were less mobile and spent more time in the Chamber than
thin ones, so aµαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτwas taken to mean any set of priests whose total
weight was more than half the total weight of all priests, rather than a simple ma-
jority of the priests. When a group of thin priests complained that this was unfair,
actual weights were replaced with symbolic weights based on a priest’s attendance
record. The primary requirement for aµαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτwas that any two sets con-
taininga µαδζ∂ωριτ˘ισϵτof priests had at least one priest in common. To maintain
B2, the priest initiatinga ballotB choseB
qrm to be a majority set.
ConditionB3 requires that ifMaxVote(b,Q, B)dec is not equal toblank,t h e n
a ballot with numberb and quorumQ must have decreeMaxVote(b,Q, B)dec.I f
MaxVote(b,Q, B)dec equals blank, then the ballot can have any decree. To main-
tainB3(B), before initiatinga new ballot with ballot numberb and quorumQ,a
priestphadto ﬁnd MaxVote(b,Q, B)dec.T od ot h i s ,phadto ﬁnd MaxVote(b,q, B)
for each priestq inQ.
Recall thatMaxVote(b,q, B) is the vote with the largest ballot number less than
b amongall the votes cast byq,o r null q ifq did not vote in any ballot numbered
less thanb.P r i e s tp obtains MaxVote(b,q, B)f r o mq by an exchange of messages.
Therefore, the ﬁrst two steps in the protocol for conductinga sing le ballot initiated
byp are:10
10Priests p and q could be the same. For simplicity, the protocol is described with p sending
messages to himself in this case. In reality, a priest could talk to himself without the use of
messengers.
10 · Leslie Lamport
(1) Priestp chooses a new ballot numberb and sends aNextBallot(b)m e s s a get o
some set of priests.
(2) A priestq responds to the receipt of a NextBallot(b) message by sending a
LastVote(b,v ) message top,w h e r ev is the vote with the largest ballot number
less thanb thatq has cast, or his null votenull q ifq did not vote in any ballot
numbered less thanb.
Priestq must use notes in the back of his ledger to remember what votes he had
previously cast.
Whenq sends the LastVote(b,v ) message,v equals MaxVote(b,q, B). But the
set B of ballots changes as new ballots are initiated and votes are cast. Since priest
p is going to usev as the value ofMaxVote(b,q, B) when choosinga decree, to keep
B3(B) true it is necessary thatMaxVote(b,q, B) not change afterq has sent the
LastVote(b,v ) message. To keepMaxVote(b,q, B) from changing,q must cast no
new votes with ballot numbers betweenvbal andb. By sendingthe LastVote(b,v )
message,q is promisingnot to cast any such vote. (To keep this promise,q must
record the necessary information in his ledger.)
The next two steps in the ballotingprotocol (beg un in step 1 by priestp)a r e :
(3) After receivinga LastVote(b,v ) message from every priest in some majority
setQ,p r i e s tp initiates a new ballot with numberb,q u o r u mQ, and decreed,
whered is chosen to satisfyB3. He then records the ballot in the back of his
ledger and sends aBeginBallot(b,d ) message to every priest inQ.
(4) Upon receipt of theBeginBallot(b,d ) message, priestq decides whether or not
to cast his vote in ballot numberb. (He may not cast the vote if doingso
would violate a promise implied by aLastVote(b′,v ′) message he has sent for
some other ballot.) Ifq decides to vote for ballot numberb, then he sends a
Voted(b,q ) message top and records the vote in the back of his ledger.
The execution of step 3 is considered to add a ballotB to B,w h e r eBbal = b,
Bqrm =Q,Bvot = ∅ (no one has yet voted in this ballot), andBdec =d.I ns t e p4 ,
if priestq decides to vote in the ballot, then executingthat step is considered to
change the setB of ballots by addingq to the setBvot of voters in the ballotB ∈B .
A priest has the option not to vote in step 4, even if castinga vote would not
violate any previous promise. In fact, all the steps in this protocol are optional.
For example, a priestq can ignore a NextBallot(b) message instead of executing
step 2. Failure to take an action can prevent progress, but it cannot cause any
inconsistency because it cannot makeB1(B)–B3(B) false. Since the only eﬀect not
receiving a message can have is to prevent an action from happening, message loss
also cannot cause inconsistency. Thus, the protocol guarantees consistency even if
priests leave the chamber or messages are lost.
Receivingmultiple copiesofamessagecancausean actionto berepeated. Except
in step 3, performingthe action a second time has no eﬀect. For example, sending
several Voted(b,q ) messages in step 4 has the same eﬀect as sending just one.
The repetition of step 3 is prevented by usingthe entry made in the back of the
ledger when it is executed. Thus, the consistency condition is maintained even if a
messenger delivers the same message several times.
Steps 1–4 describe the complete protocol for initiatinga ballot and votingon it.
The Part-Time Parliament · 11
All that remains is to determine the results of the ballotingand announce when a
decree has been selected. Recall that a ballot is successful iﬀ every priest in the
quorum has voted. The decree of a successful ballot is the one chosen by the Synod.
The rest of the protocol is:
(5) Ifp has received aVoted(b,q ) message from every priestq inQ (the quorum
for ballot numberb), then he writesd (the decree of that ballot) in his ledger
and sends aSuccess(d) message to every priest.
(6) Upon receivinga Success(d) message, a priest enters decreed in his ledger.
Steps 1–6 describe how an individual ballot is conducted. The preliminary protocol
allows any priest to initiate a new ballot at any time. Each step maintainsB1(B)–
B3(B), so the entire protocol also maintains these conditions. Since a priest enters
a decree in his ledger only if it is the decree of a successful ballot, Theorem 1 implies
that the priests’ ledgers are consistent. The protocol does not address the question
of progress.
In step 3, if the decreed is determined by conditionB3, then it is possible that
this decree is already written in the ledger of some priest. That priest need not be
in the quorumQ; he could have left the Chamber. Thus, consistency would not be
guaranteed if step 3 allowed any greater freedom in choosingd.
2.3 The Basic Protocol
In the preliminary protocol, a priest must record (i) the number of every ballot
he has initiated, (ii) every vote he has cast, and (iii) everyLastVote message he
has sent. Keepingtrack of all this information would have been diﬃcult for the
busy priests. The Paxons therefore restricted the preliminary protocol to obtain
t h em o r ep r a c t i c a lbasic protocol in which each priestp had to maintain only the
followinginformation in the back of his ledg er:
lastTried[p] The number of the last ballot thatp tried to initiate, or−∞ if there
was none.
prevVote[p]T h ev o t ec a s tb yp in the highest-numbered ballot in which he voted,
or −∞ if he never voted.
nextBal[p] The largest value of b for whichp has sent aLastVote(b,v ) message,
or −∞ if he has never sent such a message.
Steps 1–6 of the preliminary protocol describe how a single ballot is conducted by
its initiator, priestp. The preliminary protocol allowsp to conduct any number
of ballots concurrently. In the basic protocol, he conducts only one ballot at a
time—ballot number lastTried[p]. Afterp initiates this ballot, he ignores messages
that pertain to any other ballot that he had previously initiated. Priestp keeps all
information about the progress of ballot numberlastTried[p] on a slip of paper. If
he loses that slip of paper, then he stops conductingthe ballot.
In the preliminary protocol, eachLastVote(b,v ) message sent by a priestq rep-
resents a promise not to vote in any ballot numbered betweenv
bal andb.I nt h e
basic protocol, it represents the stronger promise not to cast a new vote in any
ballot numbered less thanb. This stronger promise might prevent him from casting
a vote in step 4 of the basic protocol that he would have been allowed to cast in
the preliminary protocol. However, since the preliminary protocol always givesq
12 · Leslie Lamport
the option of not castinghis vote, the basic protocol does not require him to do
anythingnot allowed by the preliminary protocol.
Steps 1–6 of the preliminary protocol become the followingsix steps for conduct-
inga ballot in the basic protocol. (All information used byp to conduct the ballot,
other than lastTried[p], prevVote[p], and nextBal[p], is kept on a slip of paper.)
(1) Priestpchoosesanewballotnumber bgreaterthan lastTried[p], setslastTried[p]
tob, and sends aNextBallot(b) message to some set of priests.
(2) Upon receipt of aNextBallot(b) message fromp withb> nextBal[q], priestq
sets nextBal[q]t ob and sends a LastVote(b,v ) message top,w h e r ev equals
prevVote[q]. (A NextBallot(b) message is ignored ifb ≤ nextBal[q].)
(3) After receivinga LastVote(b,v ) message from every priest in some majority
setQ,w h e r eb = lastTried[p], priestp initiates a new ballot with numberb,
quorum Q, and decreed,w h e r ed is chosen to satisfyB3. He then sends a
BeginBallot(b,d ) message to every priest inQ.
(4) Upon receipt of aBeginBallot(b,d ) message withb = nextBal[q], priestq casts
hisvote in ballotnumberb,s e t sprevVote[q] to this vote, andsends aVoted(b,q )
message top.( A BeginBallot(b,d ) message is ignored ifb ̸= nextBal[q].)
(5) Ifp has received aVoted(b,q ) message from every priestq inQ (the quorum
for ballot numberb), whereb = lastTried[p], then he writesd (the decree of
that ballot) in his ledger and sends aSuccess(d) message to every priest.
(6) Upon receivinga Success(d) message, a priest enters decreed in his ledger.
The basic protocol is a restricted version of the preliminary protocol, meaning
that every action allowed by the basic protocol is also allowed by the preliminary
protocol. Since the preliminary protocol satisﬁes the consistency condition, the
basic protocol also satisﬁes that condition. Like the preliminary protocol, the basic
protocol does not require that any action ever be taken, so it does not addresses
the question of progress.
The derivation of the basic protocol fromB1–B3 made it obvious that the consis-
tency condition was satisﬁed. However, some similarly “obvious” ancient wisdom
had turned out to be false, and skeptical citizens demanded a more rigorous proof.
Their Paxon mathematicians’ proof that the protocol satisﬁes the consistency con-
dition is reproduced in the appendix.
2.4 The Complete Synod Protocol
The basic protocolmaintains consistency, but it cannot ensure any progressbecause
it states only what a priest may do; it does not require him to do anything. The
complete protocol consists of the same six steps for conductinga ballot as the basic
protocol. To help achieve progress, it includes the obvious additional requirement
that priests perform steps 2–6 of the protocol as soon as possible. However, to
meet the progress condition, it is necessary that some priest be required to perform
step 1, which initiates a ballot. The key to the complete protocol lay in determining
when a priest should initiate a ballot.
Never initiatinga ballot will certainly prevent prog ress. However, initiatingtoo
may ballots can also prevent progress. Ifb is larger than any other ballot number,
then the receipt of a NextBallot(b) message by priest q in step 2 may elicit a
The Part-Time Parliament · 13
promise that prevents him from votingin step 4 for any previously initiated ballot.
Thus, the initiation of a new ballot can prevent any previously initiated ballot from
succeeding. If new ballots are continually initiated with increasing ballot numbers
before the previous ballots have a chance to succeed, then no progress might be
made.
Achievingthe prog ress condition requires that new ballots be initiated until one
succeeds, but that they not be initiated too frequently. To develop the complete
protocol, the Paxons ﬁrst had to know how longit took messeng ers to deliver
messages and priests to respond. They determined that a messenger who did not
leave the Chamber would always deliver a message within 4 minutes, and a priest
who remained in the Chamber would always perform an action within 7 minutes
of the event that caused the action.
11 Thus, ifp andq were in the Chamber when
some event causedp to send a message toq,a n dq responded with a reply top,t h e n
p would receive that reply within 22 minutes if neither messenger left the Chamber.
(Priestp would send the message within 7 minutes of the event,q would receive
the message within 4 more minutes, he would respond within 7 minutes, and the
reply would reachp within 4 more minutes.)
Suppose that only a single priestp was initiatingballots, and that he did so
by sendinga messag e to every priest in step 1 of the protocol. Ifp initiated a
ballot when a majority set of priests was in the chamber, then he could expect
to execute step 3 within 22 minutes of initiatingthe ballot, and to execute step 5
within another 22 minutes. If he was unable to execute the steps by those times,
then either some priest or messenger left the Chamber afterp initiated the ballot,
or a larger-numbered ballot had previously been initiated by another priest (before
p became the only priest to initiate ballots). To handle the latter possibility,p had
to learn about any ballot numbers greater thanlastTried[p] used by other priests.
This could be done by extendingthe protocol to require that if a priestq received
a NextBallot(b)o ra BeginBallot(b,d ) message fromp withb< nextBal[q], then he
sentp a message containingnextBal[q]. Priest p would then initiate a new ballot
with a larger ballot number.
Still assumingthat p was the only priest initiatingballots, suppose that he were
required to initiate a new ballot iﬀ (i) he had not executed step 3 or step 5 within
the previous 22 minutes, or (ii) he learned that another priest had initiated a
higher-numbered ballot. If the Chamber doors were locked withp and a majority
set of priests inside, then a decree would be passed and recorded in the ledgers of
all priests in the Chamber within 99 minutes. (It could take 22 minutes forp to
start the next ballot, 22 more minutes to learn that another priest had initiated
a larger-numbered ballot, then 55 minutes to complete steps 1–6 for a successful
ballot.) Thus, the progress condition would be met if only a single priest, who did
not leave the chamber, were initiatingballots.
The complete protocol therefore included a procedure for choosinga sing le priest,
called the president, to initiate ballots. In most forms of government, choosing a
11I am assuming a value of 30 seconds for the δζ∂ιφ˘ι, the Paxon unit of time. This value is within
the range determined from studies of hourglass shards. The reaction time of priests was so long
because they had to respond to every message within 7 minutes (14 δζ∂ιφ˘ι), even if a number of
messages arrived simultaneously.
14 · Leslie Lamport
president can be a diﬃcult problem. However, the diﬃcultly arises only because
most governments require that there be exactly one president at any time. In the
United States, for example, chaos would result if some people thought Bush had
been elected president while others thought that Dukakis had, since one of them
mightdecidetosignabillintolawwhiletheotherdecidedtovetoit. However,inthe
Paxon Synod, havingmultiple presidents could only impede prog ress; it could not
cause inconsistency. For the complete protocol to satisfy the progresscondition, the
method for choosingthe president needed only to satisfy the followingpresidential
selection requirement:
If no one entered or left the Chamber, then afterT minutes exactly one
priest in the Chamber would consider himself to be the president.
Ifthe presidentialselectionrequirementweremet, then the complete protocolwould
have the property that if a majority set of priests were in the chamber and no one
entered or left the Chamber forT + 99 minutes, then at the end of that period
every priest in the Chamber would have a decree written in his ledger.
The Paxons chose as president the priest whose name was last in alphabetical
order amongthe names of all priests in the Chamber, thoug h we don’t know exactly
how this wasdone. The presidential selection requirement would havebeen satisﬁed
if a priest in the Chamber sent a message containing his name to every other priest
at least once everyT −11 minutes, and a priest considered himself to be president
iﬀ he received no message from a “higher-named” priest forT minutes.
The complete Synod protocol was obtained from the basic protocol by requiring
prieststoperformsteps2–6promptly, addingamethod forchoosingapresidentwho
initiated ballots, and requiringthe president to initiate ballots at the appropriate
times. Manydetails ofthe protocolarenot known. I havedescribedsimple methods
for selectinga president and for decidingwhen the president should initiate a new
ballot, but they are undoubtedly not the ones used in Paxos. The rules I have given
require the president to keep initiatingballots even after a decree has been chosen,
thereby ensuringthat priests who have just entered the Chamber learn about the
chosen decree. There were obviously better ways to make sure priests learned about
the decree after it had been chosen. Also, in the course of selectinga president,
each priest probably sent his value oflastTried[p] to the other priests, allowingthe
president to choose a large enough ballot number on his ﬁrst try.
The Paxons realized that any protocol to achieve the progress condition must
involve measuringthe passag e of time.
12 The protocols given above for selecting
a president and initiatingballots are easily formulated as precise alg orithms that
set timers and perform actions when time-outs occur—assumingperfectly accurate
timers. A closer analysis reveals that such protocols can be made to work with
timers havinga known bound on their accuracy. The skilled g lass blowers of Paxos
had no diﬃculty constructingsuitable hourg lass timers.
Given the sophistication of Paxon mathematicians, it is widely believed that
they must have found an optimal algorithm to satisfy the presidential selection
requirement. We can only hope that this algorithm will be discovered in future
12However, many centuries were to pass before a rigorous proof of this result was given.[Fischer
et al. 1985]
The Part-Time Parliament · 15
excavations on Paxos.
3 The Multi-Decree Parliament
When Parliament was established, a protocol to satisfy its consistency and progress
requirementswasderivedfromtheSynodprotocol. Thederivationandpropertiesof
theoriginalparliamentaryprotocolaredescribedinSections3.1and3.2. Section3.3
discusses the further evolution of the protocol.
3.1 The Protocol
Instead of passingjust one decree, the Paxon Parliament had to pass a series of
numbered decrees. As in the Synod protocol, a president was elected. Anyone who
wanted a decree passed would inform the president, who would assign a number
to the decree and attempt to pass it. Logically, the parliamentary protocol used a
separate instance of the complete Synod protocol for each decree number. However,
a single president was selected for all these instances, and he performed the ﬁrst
two steps of the protocol just once.
The key to derivingthe parliamentary protocol is the observation that, in the
Synod protocol, the president does not choosethe decree or the quorum until step 3.
A newly elected presidentp can send to some set of legislators a single message that
serves as theNextBallot(b) message for all instances of the Synod protocol. (There
are an inﬁnite number of instances—one for each decree number.) A legislatorq
can reply with a single message that serves as theLastVote messages for step 2 of
all instances of the Synod protocol. This message contains only a ﬁnite amount of
information, sinceq can have voted in only a ﬁnite number of instances.
When the new president has received a reply from every member of a majority
set, he is ready to perform step 3 for every instance of the Synod protocol. For
some ﬁnite number of instances (decree numbers), the choice of decree in step 3 will
be determined byB3. The president immediately performs step 3 for each of those
instances to try passingthese decrees. Then, whenever he receives a request to pass
a decree, he chooses the lowest-numbered decree that he is still free to choose, and
he performs step 3 for that decree number (instance of the Synod protocol) to try
to pass the decree.
The followingmodiﬁcations to this simple protocol lead to the actual Paxon
Parliament’s protocol.
—There is no reason to go through the Synod protocol for a decree number whose
outcome is already known. Therefore, if a newly elected president p has all
decrees with numbers less than or equal ton written in his ledger, then he sends
a NextBallot(b,n) message that serves as aNextBallot(b) message in all instances
of the Synod protocol for decree numbers larger thann. In his response to this
message, legislatorq informspofalldecreesnumberedgreaterthan nthatalready
appear inq’s ledger (in addition to sending the usualLastVote information for
decrees not in his ledger), and he asksp to send him any decrees numberedn or
less that are not in his ledger.
—Suppose decrees 125 and 126 are introduced late Friday afternoon, decree 126 is
passed and is written in one or two ledgers, but before anything else happens, the
legislators all go home for the weekend. Suppose also that the following Monday,
16 · Leslie Lamport
∆φωρκ is elected the new president and learns about decree 126, but she has no
knowledge of decree 125 because the previous president and all legislators who
had voted for it are still out of the Chamber. She will hold a ballot that passes
decree 126, which leaves a gap in the ledgers. Assigning number 125 to a new
decree would cause it to appear earlier in the ledger than decree 126, which had
been passed the previous week. Passingdecrees out of order in this way mig ht
cause confusion—for example, if the citizen who proposed the new decree did so
because he knew decree 126 had already passed. Instead,∆φωρκ would attempt
to pass
125: The ides of February is national olive day
a traditional decree that made absolutely no diﬀerence to anyone in Paxos. In
general, a new president would ﬁll any gaps in his ledger by passing the “olive-
day” decree.
The consistency and progress properties of the parliamentary protocol follow
immediately from the correspondingproperties of the Synod protocol from which
it was derived. To our knowledge, the Paxons never bothered writing a precise
description of the parliamentary protocol because it was so easily derived from the
Synod protocol.
3.2 Properties of the Protocol
3.2.1 T h eO r d e r i n go fD e c r e e sBallotingcould take place concurrently for many
diﬀerent decree numbers, with ballots initiated by diﬀerent legislators—each think-
inghe was president when he initiated the ballot. We cannot say precisely in what
order decrees would be passed, especially without knowinghow a president was
selected. However, there is one important property about the orderingof decrees
that can be deduced.
A decree was said to to beproposedwhen it was chosen by the president in step 3
of the correspondinginstance of the Synod protocol. The decree was said to be
passed when it was written for the ﬁrst time in a ledger. Before a president could
propose any new decrees, he had to learn from all the members of a majority set
what decrees they had voted for. Any decree that had already been passed must
have been voted for by at least one legislator in the majority set. Therefore, the
president must have learned about all previously passed decrees before initiating
any new decree. The president would not ﬁll a gap in the ledgers with an important
decree—that is, with any decree other than the “olive-day” decree. He would also
not propose decrees out of order. Therefore, the protocol satisﬁed the following
decree-ordering property.
If decreesA andB are important and decreeA was passed before decree
B was proposed, thenA has a lower decree number thanB.
3.2.2 Behind Closed Doors Although we don’t know the details involved in
choosinga new president, we do know exactly how Parliament functioned when
the president had been chosen and no one was enteringor leavingthe Chamber.
Upon receivinga request to pass a decree—either directly from a citizen or relayed
from another legislator—the president assigned the decree a number and passed it
with the following exchange of messages. (The numbers refer to the corresponding
steps in the Synod protocol.)
The Part-Time Parliament · 17
(3) The president sent aBeginBallot message to each legislator in a quorum.
(4) Each legislator in the quorum sent aVoted message to the president.
(5) The president sent aSuccess message to every legislator.
This is a total of three message delays and about 3N messages, assuming a
parliament ofN legislators and a quorum of aboutN/2. Moreover, if Parliament
was busy, the president would combine theBeginBallot message for one decree with
the Success message for a previous one, for a total of only 2N messages per decree.
3.3 Further Developments
GoverningtheislandturnedouttobeamorecomplextaskthanthePaxonsrealized.
A number of problems arose whose solutions required changes to the protocol. The
most important of these changes are described below.
3.3.1 Picking a President The president of parliament was originally chosen
by the method that had been used in the Synod, which was based purely on the
alphabetical orderingof names. Thus, when leg islatorΩκι returned from a six-
month vacation, he was immediately made president—even though he had no idea
what had happened in his absence. Parliamentary activity came to a halt while
Ωκι, who was a slow writer, laboriously copied six months worth of decrees to bring
his ledger up to date.
This incident led to a debate about the best way to choose a president. Some
Paxons urged that once a legislator became president, he should remain president
until he left the Chamber. An inﬂuential group of citizens wanted the richest
legislator in the Chamber to be president, since he could aﬀord to hire more scribes
and other servants to help him with the presidential duties. They argued that once
a rich legislator had brought his ledger up to date, there was no reason for him
not to assume the presidency. Others, however, argued that the most upstanding
citizen should be made president, regardless of wealth. Upstanding probably meant
less likely to be dishonest, although no Paxon would publicly admit the possibility
of oﬃcial malfeasance. Unfortunately, the outcome of this debate is not known; no
record exists of the presidential selection protocol that was ultimately used.
3.3.2 Long Ledgers As the years progressed and Parliament passed more and
more decrees, Paxons had to pore over an ever longer list of decrees to ﬁnd the
current olive tax or what color goat could be sold. A legislator who returned to the
Chamber after an extended voyag e had to do quite a bit of copyingto bringhis
ledger up to date. Eventually, the legislators were forced to convert their ledgers
from lists of decrees into law books that contained only the current state of the law
and the number of the last decree whose passage was reﬂected in that state.
To learn the current olive tax, one looked in the law book under “taxes”; to learn
what color goat could be sold, one looked under “mercantile law”. If a legislator’s
ledger contained the law through decree 1298 and he learned that decree 1299 set
the olive tax to 6 drachmas per ton, he just changed the entry for the olive-tax law
and noted that his ledger was complete through decree 1299. If he then learned
about decree 1302, he would write it down in the back of the ledger and wait until
he learned about decrees 1300 and 1301 before incorporatingdecree 1302 into the
law book.
18 · Leslie Lamport
To enable a legislator who had been gone for a short time to catch up without
copyingthe entire law book, leg islators kept a list of the past week’s decrees in the
back of the book. They could have kept this list on a slip of paper, but it was
convenient for a legislator to enter decrees in the back of the ledger as they were
passed and update the law book only two or three times a week.
3.3.3 Bureaucrats As Paxos prospered, legislators became very busy. Parlia-
ment could no longer handle all details of government, so a bureaucracy was es-
tablished. Instead of passinga decree to declare whether each lot of cheese was ﬁt
for sale, Parliament passed a decree appointinga cheese inspector to make those
decisions.
It soon became evident that selectingbureaucrats was not as simple as it ﬁrst
seemed. Parliament passed a decree making∆˘ικστρα the ﬁrst cheese inspector.
After some months, merchants complained that∆˘ικστρα was too strict and was
rejectingperfectly g ood cheese. Parliamentthen replaced him by passingthe decree
1375: Γωυδα is the new cheese inspector
But∆˘ικστραdid not paycloseattentionto whatParliamentdid, sohe did not learn
ofthis decreerightaway. Therewas aperiod of confusionin the cheese marketwhen
both∆˘ικστρα andΓωυδα were inspectingcheese and makingconﬂictingdecisions.
To prevent such confusion, the Paxons had to guarantee that a position could
be held by at most one bureaucrat at any time. To do this, a president included
as part of each decree the time and date when it was proposed. A decree making
∆˘ικστρα the cheese inspector might read
2716: 8:30 15 Jan 72— ∆˘ικστρα is cheese inspector for 3 months
This declares his term to begin either at 8:30 on 15 January or when the previous
inspector’s term ended—whichever was later. His term would end at 8:30 on 15
March, unless he explicitly resigned by asking the president to pass a decree like
2834: 9:15 3 Mar 72— ∆˘ικστρα resigns as cheese inspector
A bureaucrat was appointed for a short term, so he could be replaced quickly—
for example, if he left the island. Parliament would pass a decree to extend the
bureaucrat’s term if he was doinga satisfactory job.
A bureaucrat needed to tell time to determine if he currently held a post. Me-
chanical clocks were unknown on Paxos, but Paxons could tell time accurately to
within 15 minutes by the position of the sun or the stars.
13 If ∆˘ικστρα’s term
began at 8:30, he would not start inspecting cheese until his celestial observations
indicated that it was 8:45.
It is easy to make this method of appointingbureaucratsworkif higher-numbered
decrees alwayshavelater proposaltimes. But what if Parliamentpassed the decrees
2854: 9:45 9 Apr 78— Φρανσϵζis wine taster for 2 months
2855: 9:20 9 Apr 78— Πνυϵλ˘ι is wine taster for 1 month
13Cloudy days are rare in Paxos’s balmy climate.
The Part-Time Parliament · 19
that were proposed between 9:30 and 9:35 by diﬀerent legislators who both thought
they were president? Such out-of-order proposal times are easily prevented because
the parliamentary protocol satisﬁes the followingproperty.
If two decrees are passed by diﬀerent presidents, then one of the presi-
dents proposed his decree after learningthat the other decree had been
proposed.
To see that this property is satisﬁed, suppose that ballot numberb was successful
for decree D, ballot number b
′ was successful for decree D′,a n db<b ′.L e t
q be a legislator who voted in both ballots. The balloting for D′ began with
a NextBallot(b′,n) message. If the sender of that message did not already know
aboutD,t h e nn is less than the decree number ofD,a n dq’s reply to theNextBallot
message must state that he voted forD.
3.3.4 Learning the Law In addition to requestingthe passag e of decrees, ordi-
nary citizens needed to inquire about the current law of the land. The Paxons
at ﬁrst thought that a citizen could simply examine the ledger of any legislator,
but the followingincident demonstrated that a more sophisticated approach was
needed. For centuries, it had been legal to sell only white goats. A farmer named
∆ωλϵφgot Parliament to pass the decree
77: The sale of black goats is permitted
∆ωλϵφthen instructed his goatherd to sell some black goats to a merchant named
Σκϵϵν. As a law-abidingcitizen, Σκϵϵνasked legislatorΣτωκµϵ˘ιρ if such a sale
would be legal. ButΣτωκµϵ˘ιρ had been out of the Chamber and had no entry in
his ledger past decree 76. He advisedΣκϵϵνthat the sale would be illegal under
the current law, soΣκϵϵνrefused to buy the goats.
This incident led to the formulation of the followingmonotonicity condition on
inquiries about the law.
If one inquiry precedes a second inquiry, then the second inquiry cannot
reveal an earlier state of the law than the ﬁrst.
If a citizen learns that a particular decree has been passed, then the process of
acquiringthat knowledg e is considered to be an implicit inquiry to which this
condition applies. As we will see, the interpretation of the monotonicity condition
changed over the years.
Initially, the monotonicity condition was achieved by passinga decree for each
inquiry. IfΣ∂ν˘ιδϵρwanted to know the current tax on olives, he would get Parlia-
ment to pass a decree such as
87: CitizenΣ∂ν˘ιδϵρis reading the law
He would then read any ledger complete at leastthrough decree 86 to learnthe olive
tax as of that decree. If citizenΓρϵϵςthen inquired about the olive tax, the decree
for his inquiry was proposed after decree 87 was passed, so the decree-ordering
property (Section 3.2.1) implies that it received a decree number greater than 87.
Therefore,Γρϵϵςcould not obtain an earlier value of the olive tax thanΣ∂ν˘ιδϵρ.
20 · Leslie Lamport
This method of readingthe law satisﬁed the monotonicity condition whenprecedes
was interpreted to mean that inquiryA precedes inquiryB iﬀ A ﬁnished at an
earlier time thanB began.
Passinga decree for every inquiry soon proved too cumbersome. The Paxons
realized that a simpler method was possible if they weakened the monotonicity
condition by changing the interpretation ofprecedes. They decided that for one
event to precede another, the ﬁrst event not only had to happen at an earlier time,
but it had to be able to causally aﬀect the second event. The weaker monotonicity
condition prevents the problem ﬁrst encountered by farmer∆ωλϵφand merchant
Σκϵϵνbecause there is a causal chain of events between the end of the implicit
inquiry by∆ωλϵφand the beginning of the inquiry byΣκϵϵν.
The weaker monotonicity condition was met by usingdecree numbers in all busi-
ness transactions and inquiries. For example, farmer∆ωλϵφ, whose ﬂock included
many nonwhite goats, got Parliament to pass the decree
277: The sale of brown goats is permitted
When sellinghis brown g oats toΣκϵϵν, he informed the merchant that the sale
was legal as of decree number 277.Σκϵϵνthen asked legislatorΣτωκµϵ˘ιρ if the sale
were legal under the law through at least decree 277. IfΣτωκµϵ˘ιρ’s ledger was not
complete through decree 277, he would either wait until it was or else tellΣκϵϵν
to ask someone else. IfΣτωκµϵ˘ιρ’s ledger went through decree 298, then he would
tellΣκϵϵνthat the sale was legal as of decree number 298. MerchantΣκϵϵνwould
remember the number 298 for use in his next business transaction or inquiry about
the law.
The Paxons had satisﬁed the monotonicity condition, but ordinary citizens dis-
liked havingto remember decree numbers. Ag ain, the Paxons solved the problem
by re-interpretingthe monotonicity condition—this time, by chang ingthe meaning
of state of the law . They divided the law into separate areas, and a legislator was
chosen as specialist for each area. The current state of each area of the law was
determined by that specialist’s ledger. For example, suppose decree 1517 changed
the tariﬀ law and decree 1518 changed the tax law. The tax law would change
ﬁrst if the tax-law specialist learned of both decrees before the tariﬀ-law specialist
learned of either, yieldinga state of the law that could not be obtained by enacting
the decrees in numerical order.
To avoid conﬂictingdeﬁnitions of the current state, the Paxons required that
there be at most one specialist at a time for any area. This requirement was
satisﬁed by usingthe same method to choose specialists that was used to choose
bureaucrats(seeSection3.3.3). Ifeachinquiryinvolvedonlyasingleareaofthe law,
monotonicity was then achieved by directingthe inquiry to that area’s specialist,
who answered it from his ledger. Since learning that a law had passed constituted
the result of an implicit inquiry, the Paxons required that a decree change at most
one area of the law, and that notiﬁcation of the decree’s passage could come only
from the area’s specialist.
Inquiries involvingmultiple areas were not hard to handle. When merchant
Λισκωφ asked if the tariﬀ on an imported golden ﬂeece was higher than the sales
tax on one purchased locally, the tax-law and tariﬀ-law specialists had to cooperate
to provide an answer. For example, the tax specialist could answerΛισκωφ by ﬁrst
The Part-Time Parliament · 21
askingthe tariﬀ specialist for the tariﬀ on g olden ﬂeeces, so longas he made no
changes to his ledger before receiving a reply.
This method proved satisfactory until it became necessary to make a sweeping
change to several areas of the law at one time. The Paxons then realized that the
necessary requirement for maintainingmonotonicity was not that a decree aﬀect
only asingle area, but thateveryareait aﬀects havethe same specialist. Parliament
could change severalareasof the law with a single decree by ﬁrst appointing a single
legislatorto be the specialist for all those areas. Moreover, the same areacouldhave
multiple specialists, so longas that area of the law was not allowed to chang e. Just
before income taxes were due, Parliament would appoint several tax-law specialists
to handle the seasonal ﬂood of inquiries about the tax law.
3.3.5 Dishonest Legislators and Honest Mistakes Despite oﬃcial assertions to
the contrary, there must have been a few dishonest legislators in the history of
Paxos. When caught, they were probably exiled. By sending contradictory mes-
sages, a malicious legislator could cause diﬀerent legislators’ ledgers to be inconsis-
tent. Inconsistency could also result from a lapse of memory by an honest legislator
or messenger.
When inconsistencies were recognized, they could easily be corrected by passing
decrees. For example, disagreement about the current olive tax could be eliminated
by passinga new decree declaringthe tax to have a certain value. The diﬃcult
problem lay in correctinginconsistent ledg ers even if no one was aware of the
inconsistency.
The existence of dishonesty or mistakes by legislators can be inferred from the
redundant decrees that began appearing in ledgers several years after the founding
of Parliament. For example, the decree
2605: The olive tax is 9 drachmas per ton
was passed even though decree 2155 had already set the olive tax to 9 drachmas
per ton, and no interveningdecree had chang ed it. Parliament apparently cycled
through its laws every six months so that even if legislators’ ledgers were initially
inconsistent, all legislators would agree on the current law of the land within six
months. It is believed that by the use of these redundant decrees, the Paxons
made their Parliament self-stabilizing. (Self-stabilizing is a modern term due to
Dijkstra [Dijkstra 1974].)
It is not clear precisely what self-stabilization meant in a Parliament with leg-
islators comingand g oingat will. The Paxons would not have been satisﬁed with
a deﬁnition that required all legislators to be in the Chamber at one time before
consistency could be guaranteed. However, achieving consistency required that if
one legislator had an entry in his ledger for a certain decree number and another
did not, then the second legislator would eventually ﬁll in that entry.
Unfortunately, we don’t know exactly what sort of self-stabilization property
the Paxon Parliament possessed or how it was achieved. Paxon mathematicians
undoubtedly addressed the problem, but their work has not yet been found. I hope
that future archaeological expeditions to Paxos will give high priority to the search
for manuscripts on self-stabilization.
22 · Leslie Lamport
3.3.6 Choosing New Legislators At ﬁrst, membership in Parliament was hered-
itary, passingfrom parent to child. When the elder statesman Παρνας retired,
he gave his ledger to his son, who carried on without interruption. It made no
diﬀerence to other legislators whichΠαρνας they communicated with.
As old families emigrated and new ones immigrated, this system had to change.
The Paxons decided to add and remove members of Parliament by decree. This
posed a circularity problem: membership in Parliament was determined by which
decrees were passed, but passinga decree required knowingwhat constituted a
majority set, which in turn depended upon who was a member of Parliament. The
circularity was broken by lettingthe membership of Parliament used in passing
decreen be speciﬁed by the law as of decreen − 3. A president could not try to
pass decree 3255 until he knew all decrees through decree 3252. In practice, after
passingthe decree
3252: Στρωνγ is now a legislator
the president would immediately pass the “olive-day” decree as decrees 3253 and
3254.
Changing the composition of Parliament in this way was dangerous and had to
be done with care. The consistency and progress conditions would always hold.
However, the progress condition guaranteed progress only if a majority set was in
the Chamber; it did not guarantee that a majority set would ever be there. In fact,
the mechanism for choosingleg islators led to the downfall of the Parliamentary
system in Paxos. Because of a scribe’s error, a decree that was supposed to honor
sailors who had drowned in a shipwreck instead declared them to be the only
members of Parliament. Its passagepreventedanynew decrees frombeing passed—
includingthe decrees proposed to correct the mistake. Government in Paxos came
to a halt. A general namedΛαµπσων took advantage of the confusion to stage
a coup, establishinga military dictatorship that ended centuries of prog ressive
government. Paxos grew weak under a series of corrupt dictators, and was unable
to repel an invasion from the east that led to the destruction of its civilization.
4 Relevance to Computer Science
4.1 The State Machine Approach
Although Paxos’s Parliament was destroyed many centuries ago, its protocol is still
useful. For example, consider a simple distributed database system that might be
used as a name server. A state of the database consists of an assignment of values
to names. Copies of the database are maintained by multiple servers. A client
program can issue, to any server, a request to read or change the value assigned to
a name. There are two kinds of read request: aslow read, which returns the value
currently assigned to a name, and afast read, which is faster but might not reﬂect
a recent change to the database.
There is an obvious correspondence between this database system and the Paxon
Parliament:
Parliament
Distributed Database
legislator ↔ server
citizen ↔ client program
current law ↔ database state
The Part-Time Parliament · 23
command: read(name, client) update(name, val, client)
response:( client, value of name)( client, “ok”)
new state :Same as current state Same as current state
except value of name
changed to val
Fig. 2. State machine for simple database.
A client’s request to change a value is performed by passing a decree. Aslow read
involves passinga decree, as described in Section 3.3.4. Afast read is performed by
readingthe server’scurrentversionofthe database. ThePaxonParliamentprotocol
provides a distributed, fault-tolerant implementation of the database system,
This method of implementinga distributed database is an instance of the state
machine approach, ﬁrst proposed in [Lamport 1978]. In this approach, one ﬁrst
deﬁnes a state machine, which consists of a set of states, a set of commands, a set
of responses, and a function that assigns a response/state pair (a pair consisting of
a response and a state) to each command/state pair. Intuitively, a state machine
executes a command by producinga response and chang ingits state; the command
and the machine’s current state determine its response and its new state. For the
distributed database, a state-machine state is just a database state. The state-
machine commands and the function specifyingthe response and new state are
described in Figure 2.
In the state-machine approach, a system is implemented with a network of server
processes. The servers transform client requests into state machine commands,
execute the commands, and transform the state-machine responses into replies to
clients. A general algorithm ensures that all servers obtain the same sequence of
commands, thereby ensuringthat they all produce the same sequence of responses
and state changes—assuming they all start from the same initial state. In the
database example, a client request to perform aslow read or to change a value is
transformed into a state-machineread or update command. That command is
executed, and the state-machine response is transformed into a reply to the client,
which is sentto him by the serverwho receivedhis request. Since allserversperform
thesamesequenceofstate-machinecommands, theyallmaintainconsistentversions
of the database. However, at any time, some servers may have earlier versions than
others because a state-machine command need not be executed at the same time
by all servers. A server uses his current version of the state to reply to afast read
request, without executinga state-machine command.
The functionality of the system is expressed by the state machine, which is just
a function from command/state pairs to response/state pairs. Problems of syn-
chronization and fault-tolerance are handled by the general algorithm with which
servers obtain the sequence of commands. When designing a new system, only
the state machine is new. The servers obtain the state-machine commands by a
standard distributed algorithm that has already been proved correct. Functions are
much easier to design, and to get right, than distributed algorithms.
The ﬁrst algorithm for implementing an arbitrary state machine appeared in
[Lamport 1978]. Later, algorithms were devised to tolerate up to any ﬁxed number
f of arbitrary failures [Lamport 1984]. These algorithms guarantee that, if fewer
24 · Leslie Lamport
than f processes fail, then state machine commands are executed within a ﬁxed
length of time. The algorithms are thus suitable for applications requiring real-
time response.
14 But if more thanf failures occur, then diﬀerent servers may have
inconsistent copies of the state machine. Moreover, the inability of two servers to
communicate with each other is equivalent to the failure of one of them. For a
system to have a low probability of losingconsistency, it must use an alg orithm
with a large value off, which in turn implies a large cost in redundant hardware,
communication bandwidth, and response time.
The PaxonParliament’sprotocolprovidesanotherwaytoimplementanarbitrary
state machine. The legislators’ law book corresponds to the machine state, and
passinga decree corresponds to executinga state-machine command. The resulting
algorithm is less robust and less expensive than the earlier algorithms. It does not
tolerate arbitrary, malicious failures, nor does it guarantee bounded-time response.
However, consistency is maintained despite the (benign) failure of any number of
processes and communication paths. The Paxon algorithm is suitable for systems
with modest reliability requirements that do not justify the expense of an extremely
fault-tolerant, real-time implementation.
If the state machine is executed with an algorithm that guarantees bounded-
time response, then time can be made part of the state, and machine actions can
be triggered by the passage of time. For example, consider a system for granting
ownershipof resources. The state can include the time at which a client wasgranted
a resource, and the state machine can automatically execute a command to revoke
ownership if the client has held the resource too long.
With the Paxon algorithm, time cannot be made part of the state in such a
natural way. If failures occur, it can take arbitrarily longto execute a command
(pass a decree), and one command can be executed before (appear earlier in the
sequence of decrees than) another command that was issued earlier. However, a
state machine can still use real time the same way the Paxon Parliament did. For
example, the method described in Section 3.3.3 for decidingwho was the current
cheese inspector can be used to decide who is the current owner of a resource.
4.2 Commit Protocols
The Paxon Synod protocol is similar to standard three-phase commit protocols
[Bernstein et al. 1987; Skeen 1982]. A Paxon ballot and a three-phase commit
protocol both involve the exchange of ﬁve messages between a coordinator (the
president) and the other quorum members (legislators). A commit protocol chooses
one of two values—commit or abort—while theSynod protocolchoosesanarbitrary
decree. To convert a commit protocol to a Synod protocol, one sends the decree
in the initial round of messages. A commit decision means that this decree was
passed, and anabort decision means that the “olive-day” decree was passed.
The Synod protocol diﬀers from a converted commit protocol because the decree
is not sent until the second phase. This allows the correspondingparliamentary
protocol to execute the ﬁrst phase just once for all decrees, so the exchange of only
three messages is needed to pass each individual decree.
The theoremson whichthe Synod protocolis basedaresimilarto resultsobtained
14These algorithms were derived from the military protocols of another Mediterranean state.
The Part-Time Parliament · 25
by Dwork, Lynch, and Stockmeyer [Dwork et al. 1988]. However, their algorithms
execute ballots sequentially in separate rounds, and they seem to be unrelated to
the Synod protocol.
Much research has been done in the ﬁeld since this article was written. The state-
machine approach has been surveyed by Schneider [1990]. The recovery protocol by Keidar
and Dolev [1996] and the totally-ordered broadcast algorithm of Fekete et al. [1997] are
quite similar to the Paxon protocol described here. The author was also apparently un-
aware that the view management protocol by Oki and Liskov [1988] seems to be equivalent
to the Paxon protocol.
Many of the reﬁnements presented in this submission have also appeared in contempo-
rary or subsequent articles. The method of delegation described in Section 3.3.3 is very
similar to the leases mechanism of Gray and Cheriton [1989]. The technique of Section
3.3.4 in which the Paxons satisfy the monotonicity condition by using decree numbers is
described by Ladin et al. [1992]. The technique of Section 3.3.6 for adding new legislators
was also given by Schneider [1990].
K. M.
Appendix: Proof of Consistency of the Synodic Protocol
A1 The Basic Protocol
The Synod’s basic protocol, described informally in Section 2.3, is stated here
using modern algorithmic notation. We begin with the variables that a priestp
must maintain. First come the variables that represent information kept in his
ledger. (For convenience, the voteprevVote[p] used in Section 2.3 is replaced by its
components prevBal[p]a n dprevDec[p].)
outcome[p] The decree written inp’s ledger, orblank if there is nothingwritten
there yet.
lastTried[p] The number of the last ballot thatp tried to begin, or−∞ if there was
none.
prevBal[p] The number of the last ballot in which p voted, or −∞ if he never
voted.
prevDec[p] The decree for whichp last voted, orblank ifp never voted.
nextBal[p] The number of the last ballot in whichp agreed to participate, or−∞
if he has never agreed to participate in a ballot.
Next come variables representinginformation that priestp could keep on a slip of
paper:
status[p] One of the followingvalues:
idle Not conductingor tryingto beg in a ballot
trying Tryingto beg in ballot numberlastTried[p]
pol ling Now conductingballot number lastTried[p]
Ifp has lost his slip of paper, thenstatus[p] is assumed to equalidle
and the values of the followingfour variables are irrelevant.
prevVotes[p] The set of votes received inLastVote messages for the current ballot
(the one with ballot numberlastTried[p]).
26 · Leslie Lamport
quorum[p]I f status[p]= pol ling, then the set of priests formingthe quorum of
the current ballot; otherwise, meaningless.
voters[p]I f status[p]= pol ling, then the set of quorum members from whomp
has received Voted messages in the current ballot; otherwise, mean-
ingless.
decree[p]I f status[p]= pol ling, then the decree of the current ballot; otherwise,
meaningless.
Thereis alsothe historyvariable B, which is the set of ballotsthat havebeen started
and their progress—namely,which priests havecast votes. (A historyvariableis one
used in the development and proof of an algorithm, but not actually implemented.)
Next come the actions that priestp may take. These actions are assumed to be
atomic, meaningthat once an action is beg un, it must be completed before priest
p begins any other action. An action is described by an enabling condition and a
list of eﬀects. The enablingcondition describes when the action can be performed;
actions that receive a message are enabled whenever a messenger has arrived with
the appropriate message. The list of eﬀects describes how the action changes the
algorithm’s variables and what message, if any, it sends. (Each individual action
sends at most one message.)
Recall that ballot numbers were partitioned amongthe priests. For any ballot
numberb, the Paxons deﬁnedowner(b) to be the priest who was allowed to use
that ballot number.
The actions in the basic protocol are allowed actions; the protocol does not
require that a priest ever do anything. No attempt at eﬃciency has been made; the
actions allowp to do silly things, such as sending anotherBeginBallot message to
a priest from whom he has already received aLastVote message.
T ry New Ballot
Always enabled.
–S e tlastTried[p] to any ballot numberb, greater than its previous value, such
thatowner(b)= p.
–S e tstatus[p]t o trying.
–S e tprevVotes[p]t o ∅.
Send NextBallot Message
Enabled whenever status[p]=trying.
–S e n daNextBallot(lastTried[p]) message to any priest.
Receive NextBallot(b) Message
Ifb ≥ nextBal[p]t h e n
–S e tnextBal[p]t ob.
Send LastVote Message
Enabled whenever nextBal[p]> prevBal[p].
–S e n daLastVote(nextBal[p],v ) message to priest owner(nextBal[p]), where
v
pst =p,vbal = prevBal[p], andvdec = prevDec[p].
The Part-Time Parliament · 27
Receive LastVote(b,v) Message
Ifb = lastTried[p]a n dstatus[p]= trying,t h e n
–S e tprevVotes[p] to the union of its original value and{v}.
Start Polling Majority Set Q
Enabled when status[p]= trying andQ ⊆{vpst :v ∈ prevVotes[p]},w h e r eQ is a
majority set.
–S e tstatus[p]t o pol ling.
–S e tquorum[p]t oQ.
–S e tvoters[p]t o ∅.
–S e tdecree[p] to a decreed chosen as follows: Letv be the maximum element
of prevVotes[p]. Ifvbal ̸= −∞ thend =vdec,e l s ed can equal any decree.
–S e tB to the union of its former value and{B},w h e r eBdec =d,Bqrm =Q,
Bvot = ∅,a n dBbal = lastTried[p].
Send BeginBallot Message
Enabled when status[p]= pol ling.
–S e n daBeginBallot(lastTried[p], decree[p]) message to any priest inquorum[p].
Receive BeginBallot(b,d ) Message
Ifb = nextBal[p]> prevBal[p]t h e n
–S e tprevBal[p]t ob.
–S e tprevDec[p]t od.
– If there is a ballotB in B withBbal =b [there will be], then choose any such
B [there will be only one] and let the new value ofB be obtained from its old
value by settingBvot equal to the union of its old value and{p}.
Send Voted Message
Enabled whenever prevBal[p] ̸= −∞.
–S e n daVoted(prevBal[p],p ) message toowner(prevBal[p]).
Receive Voted(b,q ) Message
Ifb = lastTried[p]a n dstatus[p]= pol ling,t h e n
–S e tvoters[p] to the union of its old value and{q}
Succeed
Enabled whenever status[p]= pol ling, quorum[p] ⊆ voters[p], and outcome[p]=
blank.
–S e toutcome[p]t o decree[p].
Send Success Message
Enabled whenever outcome[p] ̸= blank.
–S e n daSuccess(outcome[p]) message to any priest.
Receive Success(d) Message
If outcome[p]= blank,t h e n
28 · Leslie Lamport
–S e toutcome[p]t od.
This algorithm is an abstract description of the realprotocol performedby Paxon
priests. Do the algorithm’s actions accurately model the actions of the real priests?
There were three kinds of actions that a priest could perform “atomically”: receiv-
inga messag e, writinga note or ledg er entry, and sendinga messag e. Each of these
is represented by a single action of the algorithm, except thatReceiveactions both
receive a message and set a variable. We can pretend that the receipt of a message
occurred when a priest acted upon the message; if he left the Chamber before act-
ingupon it, then we can pretend that the messag e was never received. Since this
pretense does not aﬀect the consistency condition, we can infer the consistency of
the basic Synod protocol from the consistency of the algorithm.
A2 Proof of Consistency
Toprovetheconsistencycondition, itisnecessarytoshowthat whenever outcome[p]
and outcome[q] are both diﬀerent fromblank, they are equal. A rigorous correct-
ness proof requires a complete description of the algorithm. The description given
above is almost complete. Missingis a variableM whose value is the multiset of
all messages in transit.
15 Each Send action adds a message to this multiset and
each Receive action removes one. Also needed are actions to represent the loss
and duplication of messages, as well as aFo rg e taction that represents a priest
losinghis slip of paper.
With these additions, we getan algorithmthat deﬁnes a set of possible behaviors,
in which each changeof state correspondsto one of the allowedactions. The Paxons
proved correctness by ﬁndinga predicateI such that
(1) I is true initially.
(2) I implies the desired correctness condition.
(3) Each allowed action leavesI true.
Thepredicate I waswrittenasaconjunction I1∧... ∧I7,where I1–I5wereinturn
the conjunction of predicatesI1(p)–I5(p) for all priestsp. Although most variables
are mentioned in several of the conjuncts, each variable exceptstatus[p] is naturally
associated with one conjunct, and each conjunct can be thought of as a constraint
on its associated variables. The deﬁnitions of the individual conjuncts ofI are given
below, where a list of items marked by∧ symbols denotes the conjunction of those
items. The variables associated with a conjunct are listed in bracketed comments.
I1(p)
∆
= [Associated variable: outcome[p]]
(outcome[p] ̸= blank) ⇒∃B ∈B :( Bqrm ⊆Bvot) ∧(Bdec = outcome[p])
I2(p)
∆
= [Associated variable: lastTried[p]]
∧owner(lastTried[p]) =p
∧∀B ∈B :( owner(Bbal)= p) ⇒
∧Bbal ≤ lastTried[p]
∧ (status[p]= trying) ⇒ (Bbal < lastTried[p])
15A multiset is a set that may contain multiple copies of the same element.
The Part-Time Parliament · 29
I3(p)
∆
= [Associated variables: prevBal[p], prevDec[p], nextBal[p]]
∧ prevBal[p]= MaxVote(∞,p, B)bal
∧ prevDec[p]= MaxVote(∞,p, B)dec
∧ nextBal[p] ≥ prevBal[p]
I4(p)
∆
= [Associated variable: prevVotes[p]]
(status[p] ̸= idle) ⇒
∀v ∈ prevVotes[p]: ∧v = MaxVote(lastTried[p],v pst, B)
∧ nextBal[vpst] ≥ lastTried[p]
I5(p)
∆
= [Associated variables: quorum[p], voters[p], decree[p]]
(status[p]= pol ling) ⇒
∧ quorum[p] ⊆{vpst :v ∈ prevVotes[p]}
∧∃B ∈B : ∧ quorum[p]= Bqrm
∧ decree[p]= Bdec
∧ voters[p] ⊆Bvot
∧ lastTried[p]= Bbal
I6
∆
= [Associated variable: B ]
∧B1(B) ∧B2(B) ∧B3(B)
∧∀B ∈B : Bqrm is a majority set
I7
∆
= [Associated variable: M ]
∧∀ NextBallot(b) ∈M :( b ≤ lastTried[owner(b)])
∧∀ LastVote(b,v ) ∈M : ∧v = MaxVote(b,v pst, B)
∧ nextBal[vpst] ≥b
∧∀ BeginBallot(b,d ) ∈M : ∃B ∈B :( Bbal =b) ∧(Bdec =d)
∧∀ Voted(b,p ) ∈M : ∃B ∈B :( Bbal =b) ∧(p ∈Bvot)
∧∀ Success(d) ∈M : ∃p : outcome[p]= d ̸= blank
The Paxons had to prove thatI satisﬁes the three conditions given above. The
ﬁrst condition, thatI holds initially, requires checkingthat each conjunct is true for
the initial values of all the variables. While not stated explicitly, these initial values
can be inferred from the variables’ descriptions, and checkingthe ﬁrst condition is
straightforward. The second condition, thatI implies consistency, follows fromI1,
the ﬁrst conjunct ofI6, and Theorem 1. The hard part was provingthe third
condition, the invariance ofI, which meant provingthat I is left true by every
action. This condition is proved by showingthat, for each conjunct ofI, executing
any action whenI is true leaves that conjunct true. The proofs are sketched below.
I1(p) B is chang ed only by addinga new ballot or addinga new priest toBvot for
someB ∈B , neither of which can falsifyI1(p). The value ofoutcome[p] is changed
only by theSucceed and Receive Success Message actions. The enablingcon-
dition andI5(p)i m p l yt h a tI1(p)i sl e f tt r u eb yt h eSucceed action. The enabling
condition,I1(p), and the last conjunct ofI7i m p l yt h a tI1(p)i sl e f tt r u eb yt h e
Receive Success Message action.
30 · Leslie Lamport
I2(p) This conjunct depends only onlastTried[p], status[p], andB. Only theTr y
New Ballot action changes lastTried[p], and only that action can setstatus[p]t o
trying. Since the action increases lastTried[p]t oav a l u eb with owner(b)= p,
it leavesI2(p) true. A completely new element is added to B only by a Start
Polling action; the ﬁrst conjunct ofI2(p) and the speciﬁcation of the action imply
that addingthis new element does not falsify the second conjunct ofI2(p). The
only other way B is changed is by adding a new priest toBvot for someB ∈B ,
which does not aﬀectI2(p).
I3(p) Since votes are never removed fromB, the only action that can change
MaxVote(∞,p, B) is one that adds to B a vote cast by p.O n l y aReceive
BeginBallot Message action can do that, and only that action changesprevBal[p]
and prevDec[p]. The BeginBallot conjunct ofI7 implies that this action actually
does add a vote toB,a n dB1(B)( t h eﬁ r s tc o n j u n c to fI6) implies that there is only
one ballot to which the vote can be added. The enablingcondition, the assump-
tion thatI3(p) holds before executingthe action, and the deﬁnition of MaxVote
then imply that the action leaves the ﬁrst two conjuncts ofI3(p) true. The third
conjunct is left true becauseprevBal[p] is changed only by setting it tonextBal[p],
and nextBal[p] is never decreased.
I4(p) This conjunct depends only upon the values of status[p], prevVotes[p],
lastTried[p], nextBal[q] for some priestsq,a n dB.T h ev a l u eo fstatus[p] is changed
from idle to notidle only by aT ry New Ballot action, which setsprevVotes[p]t o
∅,m a k i n gI4(p) vacuously true. The only other actions that changeprevVotes[p]
are the Fo rg e taction, which leavesI4(p) true because it sets status[p]t o idle,
and the Receive LastVote Message action. It follows from the enablingcondi-
tion and the LastVote conjunct ofI7 that the Receive LastVote Message ac-
tion preservesI4(p). The value of lastTried[p] is changed only by theTr y N e w
Ballot action, which leavesI4(p) true because it sets status[p]t o trying.T h e
value of nextBal[q] can only increase, which cannot make I4(p) false. Finally,
MaxVote(lastTried[p],v pst, B) can be changed only ifvpst is added to Bvot for
someB ∈B withBbal < lastTried[p]. But vpst is added toBvot (by a Receive
BeginBallot Message action) only if nextBal[vpst]= Bbal,i nw h i c hc a s eI4(p)
implies thatBbal ≥ lastTried[p].
I5(p)T h ev a l u eo fstatus[p]i ss e tt opol lingonly by theStart Polling action.
This action’s enablingcondition g uarantees that the ﬁrst conjunct becomes true,
and it adds the ballot toB that makes the second conjunct true. No other action
changes quorum[p], decree[p], orlastTried[p] while leavingstatus[p]e q u a lt opol ling.
The value of prevVotes[p] cannot be changed whilestatus[p]= pol ling,a n dB is
chang ed only by addingnew elements or by addinga new priest toBvot.T h eo n l y
remainingpossibility forfalsifying I5(p)isthe additionofa new elementto voters[p]
by the Receive Voted Message action. The Voted conjunct ofI7, B1(B) (the
ﬁrst conjunct ofI6), and the action’s enablingcondition imply that the element
added to voters[p]i si nBvot,w h e r eB is the ballot whose existence is asserted in
I5(p).
I6S i n c eBbal andBqrm are never changed for anyB ∈B ,t h eo n l yw a yB1(B),
B2(B), and the second conjunct ofI6 can be falsiﬁed is by addinga new ballot to
The Part-Time Parliament · 31
B, which is done only by theStart Polling Majority Set Q action whenstatus[p]
equals trying. It follows from the second conjunct ofI2(p)t h a tt h i sa c t i o nl e a v e s
B1(B) true; and the assertion, in the enablingcondition, thatQ is a majority set
implies that the action leavesB2(B) and the second conjunct ofI6 true. There
are two possible ways of falsifyingB3(B): changing MaxVote(Bbal,B qrm, B)b y
addinga new vote to B, and addinga new ballot to B. A new vote is added
only by the Receive BeginBallot Message action, and I3(p)i m p l i e st h a tt h e
action adds a vote later than any other vote cast byp in B, so it cannot change
MaxVote(Bbal,B qrm, B)forany B in B. ConjunctI4(p) implies that the new ballot
added by theStart Polling action does not falsifyB3(B).
I7 I7 can be falsiﬁed either by addinga new messag e toM or by changing the
value of another variable on whichI7 depends. Since lastTried[p]a n dnextBal[p]
are never decreased, changing them cannot makeI7f a l s e .S i n c eoutcome[p] is never
changed if its value is notblank, changing it cannot falsifyI7. Since B is changed
only by addingballots and addingvotes, the only chang e to it that can makeI7
falseis the additionof a votebyvpst that makesthe LastVote(b,v )c o n j u n c tf a l s eb y
changing MaxVote(b,v pst, B). This can happen only ifvpst votes in a ballotB with
Bbal <b .B u tvpst can vote only in ballot numbernextBal[vpst], and theassumption
that this conjunct holds initially implies thatnextBal[vpst] ≥b. Therefore, we need
check only that every message that is sent satisﬁes the condition in the appropriate
conjunct ofI7.
NextBallot : Follows from the deﬁnition of theSend NextBallot Message action
and the ﬁrst conjunct ofI2(p).
LastVote : The enablingcondition of the Send LastVote Message action and
I3(p)i m p l yt h a tMaxVote(nextBal[p],p, B)= MaxVote(∞,p, B), from which it
follows that theLastVote message sent by the action satisﬁes the condition inI7.
BeginBallot : Follows fromI5(p) and the deﬁnition of the Send BeginBallot
Message action.
Voted : Follows fromI3(p), the deﬁnition ofMaxVote, and the deﬁnition of the
Send Voted Message action.
Success : Follows from the deﬁnition ofSend Success Message.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Daniel Duchamp pointed out to me the need for a new state-machine implementa-
tion. Discussions with Mart´ın Abadi, Andy Hisgen, Tim Mann, and Garret Swart
led me to Paxos.Λϵων´ιδαςΓκ ´ιµπας providedinvaluable assistance with the Paxon
dialect.
References
Bernstein, P. A. , Hadzilacos, V. , and Goodman, N. 1987. Concurrency Control and Re-
covery in Database Systems . Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
De Prisco, R. , Lampson, B. , and L ynch, N. 1997. Revisiting the Paxos algorithm. In
M. Mavronicolas and P. Tsigas (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Work-
shop on Distributed Algorithms (WDAG 97) , Volume 1320 of Lecture Notes in Computer
32 · Leslie Lamport
Science, Saarbruken, Germany, pp. 111–125. Springer-Verlag.
Dijkstra, E. W. 1974. Self-stab ilizing systems in spite of distributed control. Commun.
ACM 17, 11 (Nov.), 643–644.
Dwork, C. , L ynch, N., and Stockmeyer, L. 1988. Consensus in the presence of partial
synchrony. Journal of the ACM 35, 2 (April), 288–323.
Fekete, A. , L ynch, N., and Shvartsman, A. 1997. Specifying and using a partitionable
group communication service. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on
Principles of Distributed Computing , pp. 53–62. ACM Press.
Fischer, M. J. , L ynch, N., a n dP a t e r s o n ,M .S .1985. Impossibility of distributed consensus
with one faulty process. Journal of the ACM 32, 2 (April), 374–382.
G r a y ,C .G .a n dC h e r i t o n ,D .R .1989. Leases:An eﬃcient fault-toerant mechanism for dis-
tributed ﬁle cache consistency. InProceedings of the Twelfth ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles , New York, pp. 202–210. ACM.
Keidar, I. and Dolev, D. 1996. Eﬃcient message ordering in dynamic networks. InProceedings
of the 15th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing .A C M .
Ladin, R. , Liskov, B., Shrira, L. , and Ghemaw at, S. 1992. Providing high availability using
lazy replication. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 10, 4 (Nov.), 360–391.
Lamport, L. 1978. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Commun.
ACM 21, 7 (July), 558–565.
Lamport, L. 1984. Using time instead of timeout for fault-tolerant distributed systems. ACM
Trans. on Programm. Lang. Syst. 6, 2 (April), 254–280.
Lampson, B. W. 1996. How to build a highly available system using consensus. InO. Babaoglu
and K. Marzullo (Eds.), Distributed Algorithms, Volume 1151 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, Berlin, pp. 1–17. Springer-Verlag.
Oki, B. M. and Liskov, B. H. 1988. Viewstamped replication:A new primary copy method to
support highly-available distributed systems. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM
Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pp. 8–17. ACM Press.
S c h n e i d e r ,F .B .1990. Implementing fault-tolerant services using the state machine approach:
A tutorial. ACM Computing Surveys 22, 4 (Dec.), 299–319.
S k e e n ,M .D .1982. Crash recovery in a distributed database system. Ph. D. thesis, University
of California, Berkeley.
Received January 1990; Accepted March 1998